I'm sitting in John Capo's beautiful living room
looking out over the lake and chatting with John
about his experiences as a student. First
question, why did you go to A&M? I went because my
brother was going to A&M at the time and It made it
easier and was probably the least expensive place
I could find to go to school simply because we
didn't have any money. As far as you know, did you
have a choice if you had wanted one? Not really. No,
my brother would have injured me again. He injured
me many times being four years older than me. He
would have done it again. Now, high school was
where? Waco High School. Waco High School. You
visited the campus many times then before going
down to enroll. No, once. Once. What was your
impression on that visit?
It was a little stark. It was a little frightening
because my background for a college campus was
Baylor in Waco, which is gothic, beautiful, shady
trees and so forth. College Station wasn't like
that in 1948. Okay, so you enter in the fall of 1948.
Yes. Describe how you got there, the trip, and what
you took with you when you went to enroll? Who took
you, how'd you? Okay, my father was quite ill. As a
matter of fact, he died two weeks after I left to go
to A&M. And so my brother took me to A&M. He was a
senior at the time, having been at A&M, gone into
the Army, and then come back from the Army and was
there as a senior at the time. And so he took me, and I
took one footlocker. And that footlocker had a few
changes of clothes and some toiletry and some
bedding. That was it. Because I really didn't know
what I was going to need. He told me, this is what you
need. Take it. Because in those days, freshmen
were issued uniforms. So precious little
clothing went.
Can you recall your visual impression? You
referred to it briefly a while ago. What was there?
What buildings were there then? What was the
campus? The campus was the old system, now I
believe the Jack Williams building. The new area
was new, which were the low three-story red brick
dorms to the south. To the north was the library and
the petroleum engineering building, and behind
it was the chemistry building and the academic
building, and then a few dorms.
That was it. The new, new area didn't exist, which
was over by Savisa. Savisa was there, of course.
However, that wasn't my freshman impression. I
was a freshman at Bryan Air Force Base. Oh, good. So
my impression of A&M, when I went down to enroll as a
freshman, was going into the Army. I lived in a
barracks where we all lived in a row. Oh, good,
good. Because, see, we haven't had many of those.
All right, did you even... Go to the campus? Not as I
came in to become a freshman, no. I did not even go to
the campus. I had seen the campus before, but I went
straight to Bryan Air Force Base. Describe
physically what there was. Like any World War II
base, you go through a gate with a guard on it. They
wanted to make sure we stayed in there once we got
there. Was this Guard Air Force? No, no, no. By then
it was Texas A&M University. I take part in the A&M
College of Texas. We drove down to what was an
office building, again made out of wood, single
story. asphalt shingle painted white and across
from it was the chapel. Typical World War II, throw
it up quickly, wooden Air Force base, Air Corps
base. Behind it was a long row of barracks
buildings where we would ultimately live. and
some of them were converted into classrooms.
Behind that was the flight line with hangars, and
parked on the ramp outside were old Stearman
bi-wing training planes. And that's what you saw
when you wrote, when you came in. All right. This
was not the first year for Fish out there, was it?
No, it was the second. Second, all right. And all
freshmen were out there? All freshmen went out
there. OK. Describe how you then got checked in and
so forth.
Do you remember? Vaguely, because you're being
herded like cattle. And you go from here to there
and sign here. I believe that the registration
occurred in what was the dining hall. tables were
set around for the various classes and if you're
going to take this english you go to that table and
find a class that you can get into and get into it and
then you move to the next and the next and the next
these that's my impression i'm sorry it's a long
about how many freshmen We were a pretty large
class. There were nearly 1,000 of us as freshmen.
And only freshmen? Only freshmen. Who was there to
give leadership or orientation?
There were army officers and sergeants in the army
out of the staff of the commandant.
tactical officers they are called, but we had both
officers and sergeants. We did not have
upperclassmen at all. So your class missed some of
the campus hazing and so forth that might have,
freshmen might have had. They made up for it when we
were sophomores, so it's okay. Who were, do you
remember the names of any of those key
active duty attack officers and so forth? Who was
Hayden Boatner? General Hayden L. Boatner was
commandant and after that nobody was in part. Did
you all see Boatner? Oh yes. Describe him and your
impression of him. Small man, rotund, heavy set.
Fixed face. Not a, no smile, strictly business,
pure business by the numbers. One, two, three,
welcome here. You are going to be, these people are
going to tell you what to do and when to do and how to
do it and you better do what they say. You took, do
you remember how many hours you took? I think I took
18. And you took all your courses out there? Yes. Do
you remember any of the faculty members by name who
were out there?
Fish drill team was out there. I think it
originated because we were isolated. That's what
I've heard. It originated there because of the
isolation. And I understand there was a fish band?
Yes. Can you describe anything about either of
those? Who was in them? Just the students. Same
thing. No, but was it highly selected? Was it hard
to get in the... It was not difficult to get in the
band. It was difficult to get on the fish drill
team. You had to be good. And you had to want to do it
and so forth. But the band would take warm bodies
because they were trying to put together a
reasonable band. As a band has always been, as far
as I know, it was not a formal organization or an
official organization. It was... done on your own
time and because you enjoyed being in a band. And it
played for our parades out there. And they were
generally people that had been through music in
high school and were pretty good. They were good.
We did a good job. We did go to the campus for
football games and the Fish Band marched
independently. Really? About how big was it? The
number one? Very big. 100? No, I think 40, 50,
small, small. All right, let's talk about that
when you all went to the campus. About how often did
you go to the campus? For a football game in the
fall. It wasn't every weekend either. But you went
to each football game? Yes. Okay, each home game.
What else? If buses came, picked you up, you went
in, you marched in, you stood where the freshmen
stood. You were freshmen. It gave the
upperclassmen a chance to look at you and to harass
you a little bit. And at the end of the game, you were
picked up and taken back to the airport base. All
right. So did you all go for dances or concerts or
chapel? No, we had a chapel out there. So football
games? That's about the only thing we got in the
fall. That's about the only thing that I can recall
that we... Did we go for any other time? We, of
course, were off on weekends, and because I had a
brother over there, I would go on other weekends
simply because my brother was there. But you
didn't go over there and spend the night? Oh, no.
How would... If you wanted to go, you or any of your
buddies wanted to go, almost no one had a car, how
did you get there? They ran buses. There were buses
that went back and forth. You had to get back on that
last bus. Now my brother had a car and
Sometimes, if he was in a good mood, he'd bring me
back. Other than that, he was a senior dealing with
the pressure. The faculty that taught out at the
air base lived out there? Or did they? I don't think
so. I don't think so. The base housing, as I recall,
was not occupied. You lived in a barracks? Classic
barracks. No, you didn't have a room? No. There was
a long single, the barrack was a long single room
with double deck bunk stacked down the middle, a
heater at each end and you were, the bunks were
stacked between the two heaters.
Your bunk mate, you had a desk on one end of your bunk
and he had a desk on the floor on the other, a desk and
chair. and that was your study place, and that was
your bunk, so you had a little strip of floor about
five feet wide. Had people walking behind you
while you're trying to study up and down. Entrance
hall and storage area on the front, and a toilet on
the rear. Showers, et cetera, everything on the
rear of the building. Where did you hang your
clothing?
We have a little locker beside your desk. Small,
small locker beside your desk. Your foot locker
went under the bed? Went at the foot of the bed, one
on each end. See, in the military configuration of
a pure barracks, they would have had two beds foot
to foot in a wide aisle. By running only one bed
width, there was a good amount of space on the
outside. Now, since it was all freshmen, I'm
assuming y'all didn't play many tricks on another
student. No more than the normal. But I mean, you
didn't hide somebody's footlocker. there were no
drown outs and so forth? Oh yeah, there were drown
outs, sure. You know, just to hassle somebody. A
great recreation was to cut across the air field to
the bridge. Brazos County was dry and so you could,
if you hiked across the air base, and didn't follow
the highway. It was only about three miles to the
bridge, and there was, of course, liquor and beer
across the bridge. The big deal was to go over and
get the beer and drink it back. Did any of those
places have a name? I'm sure they did. But you don't
remember? No. I'm sure they had a name. There had
been gambling there during the war. Was there any
gambling available then? Not that I know of. Okay.
And there had been a house of ill repute over there,
reputed during the war.
Describe
for me a typical class day routine. Got up at what
time, did what, under what sequence? You got up in
the morning early. You assembled on the street in
front of the barracks. And the role was called
wearing the uniform of the day, whatever it may
have been. Whatever the uniform of the day was, you
assembled in front of the building in the uniform
of the day. And you marched to the dining hall for
breakfast. After eating,
you found your way to wherever you were to be next,
either back to your barracks or to your first
class, as the case may be. It was then typical
university. During the day, you went from class to
class. If you had time off, you went back to the
barracks or the gymnasium was active and open.
Pick up football games and baseball games were
always going on. Did you fall in and march to midday
meal? No. No, because you were quite scattered out
and there wasn't time. There wasn't time.
Everybody ate within one hour and you could not get
assembled. do the marching. You did at night. You
marched back at night. Again, you reassembled for
the evening meeting. And then again, you were on
your own. We had a lights out. And I don't remember
the time. 10 or 10.30 was early, which meant you had
to get your studying done. And they were checking
on you to make sure you had your head in focus. By and
large, you studied at your desk. At your desk. Was
there a library of any sort, any kind of a building?
No.
If you needed something
from the library, you determined what it was, and
it was brought to you from the campus. Where were
the classes held? They were held in what had been I
suppose office buildings and some of the barracks
converted
into classes. There was still in the, because the
airplanes were stored there, the Air Force still
had storage stuff around, so really the
university did not occupy every building on the
base. Do you remember any classes that anyone
wanted to take that were not available? No, I don't
think they were offered. In those days, you had a
pretty packed freshman course. If you are going to
be a freshman and you're going for a science
degree, these are the courses that you will take as
a freshman. If you're going for an arts degree,
these are the courses that you will take as a
freshman. But there were freshman courses that
engineering majors, science majors, and so on?
Yes. What was your major? Mine was science. I went
for engineering. Engineering, so I was after
science. So from day one, that was your goal. Let's
see. Okay, then let's say you wanted to take a nap in
the middle of the afternoon. Was that even
possible in that barracks? Well, you learn to.
Yeah, people are coming in hollering and throwing
their books down and so forth, but you could do the
best you can, but there was no guarantee of peace,
no. All right, then tell me what y'all, now you had
Saturday morning classes. Let's say it's now noon
Saturday. What would have been a weekend of fun and
relaxation? What did y'all do on Saturday
afternoon, night, and Sunday? That's usually
when you would see pickup sports around. Go to
town, go to a movie. Go to town meant to do that?
Right. Debride, not College Station. How did you
get to work? Again, buses ran. A few people had
cars, except so many of my friends did. But a movie,
a few sports, that's pretty much, it was bare
bones. Now, on Saturday night, was there a bed
check? Yes. Yes. Sunday, were there religious
services out there? There was usually a religious
service at the chapel. You were free to go to town to
any church you wanted to go to. Or you were free not
to go to church, as you may see fit. I would guess
that most of the freshmen, the majority of them,
slept until noon. It was a chance to get some sleep,
and the vast majority did. So that's the only day
that there wasn't a morning fallout. Yes, Sunday.
How were you all, on a weekday, how were you
awakened? By what method? Well, the bugle,
recording that or it was at all army bases through
loudspeakers all over everywhere and would wake
the dead with its volume was there. You were
usually up before that because you had a limited
number of people could take a shower at a time. A
limited number could shave at a time. And so if you
were smart, you were probably up before that,
particularly if you have an 8 o'clock class and
can't come back after breakfast. If you can't come
back to the dorm, you're up long before that
vehicle. Who was it that
informed you all, prepared you for any traditions
and slang and so forth? Was that done that year? Not
really. Not really. There was some of it that went
along. But no, not really. You picked up a little
bit from the upperclassmen when you were on campus
for football afternoons. You picked a little bit
up then. But no, not really. So you didn't know Agus
Lane then for food yet? Yeah, you learned all of
that. I don't remember how, whether it was just
natural Because y'all wouldn't have whipped out
to another fish. No, not really. We did insist when
you were with a group, you met everybody in the
group, but not the formal thing. Not the standard
attention. You must have been organized as
companies. And so a fellow freshman was the
company Yes. Leader? There would be a company
commander and he was usually the, he was selected
by the staff, by the tactical officer. What
company were you in? I wish you hadn't asked me
that. I have the slightest notion. Did the company
have anything to do with the branch in which you
hoped to be? They were broken down into Army and Air
Force. Those were the only two divisions. And that
was a selection you could make coming here. See, I
haven't run into many people who were out there.
That's why I'm quizzing you. We were pretty stark
and pretty minimal. And a whole lot of people
didn't stay. It just wasn't what a college
experience should be. It was not. Of the
approximately 1,000 who started, About how many
were back as sophomores? Less than half. Less than
half. A lot before Christmas. A lot didn't come
back after Christmas. And even more didn't come
back. All right. You came to campus for football
games. What about midnight Yale practice? No. We
did Yale practice out there. Basketball games? In
the spring. That was an option, but there were
really too many. You know, basketball games go on
every day of the week, and there were really too
many, and the pressure was too great with
transportation tonight. Did you all come for
final review? Yes. Describe what it was like to be
in final review, and you're going to become no
longer a freshman. Again, we marched as our own
units, and it was... if you will, just another
parade because we marched as our own units. So it
was really, you know, final review is a big deal to
us, but it's just another damn parade. And you were
on the drill field? On where the MSC now. That was
the only place. But it was then, it had nothing on
the south side of it, did it? No, no. They were
clearing and preparing to build the Student
Center. So that was the beginning of construction
of the Student Center. I think we actually got into
the Student Center during my sophomore year. I
think that somewhere in there we got into the
Student Center. But I remember the construction.
What is your memory of the quality of food served
out at the Air Base? You know, I never complained
about the food. It was good food. It was well
prepared. I had no complaints. I came from a
background where sometimes we had one meal a day.
So three meals a day, I didn't eat anything. It
didn't matter. And you all did not, I believe you
said you did not have any of the games, the rituals
out there. No. All of that came in the sophomore
year and was an intense thing. Okay, now let's move
to that sophomore year. You come to the campus and
you're on the campus. Where did you live as a
sophomore? Over in what is known as the new area.
The low red brick buildings, dorms one through 12.
And you were in? I was in dorm five. What after? E
Battery Field Artillery. Did it have a nickname?
No.
Nicknames, I think, came later. Those are later
innovations. What did the juniors and seniors do
to y'all that was kind of initiation-like?
Treated us like freshmen are treated today.
So you had to clean some upperclassmen's room?
Yes, but we now were a little bit more mature. You
would do it, but you wouldn't take a whole lot. You
would take a lot off of an upperclassman. But if one
got a little bit carried away, he would get it back,
usually in spades. Describe that part. What might
happen to a junior or senior who became abusive?
Well, his room could disappear and no one would
tell him where it was and everything in it. And
where would it? Into the steam tunnels. He usually
knew where to go look for it. But it's a hard job to
haul your bed and your mattress and your books when
they've been scattered through the steam
tunnels. There's a lot of miles, a lot not miles,
but there's hundreds of yards of steam tunnels
under the ground there. And he could come back to
his room and there would be nothing there. And that
would usually deliver him, sometimes he would get
mean to the entire class. And so once we took a guy,
almost to the airport and tied him to a tree. And
nobody had any idea what happened to him. It was
about 20 hours before they found him. Then he
didn't bother us anymore. And he knew who it was? Of
course. It was very important that he know who did
it. Other good bull? Oh my. Did y'all ever put
anything in anyone's room that exploded? Yes, we
did all of those things. Firecrackers inside of a
bag of flour, which will multiply its energy by a
thousand times.
You know, just like a grain elevator explosion.
You just need a small firecracker and a paper bag of
flour, and that's a multiplication many times
over the power of the firecracker. Water. always
water every night somebody is going to get it. And
it's usually an upperclassman. It's usually that
junior or senior that's going to get it, because
the sophomore is the one who feels abused. And
somebody's going to pay one way or another. In
general, were these pranks played on somebody
that had done this? Yes. Yes. It was in
retribution, without question. They were
generally retribution.
A little bit of difference. By Thanksgiving, the
bullshit was over.
After you came back from Thanksgiving, it was
generally over. By the time you come back from
Christmas, you're just another member of the
outfit. And the upperclassmen behaved that way?
Yes, yes, the upperclassmen treated you that way.
By the time you came back at Christmas, it was all
over with. Oh, you got a frog or two in that came in at
mid-semester, and so you had to, they would hassle
him a little bit, and he would be totally not
understanding, why me, God, you know, and all of
these other people. Normally, frogs came from
what students? Well, people that had graduated
from high school in January or in December, as the
case may be, and entered as a freshman at
mid-semester. Right, but now there were frogs who
transferred from other schools. Yes, yes. That
could happen, too. Was anyone from JTAC or NTAC?
Not in my outfit. All right. Oh, I was going to ask if
they were treated differently from this
mid-semester high school grade. No, they would
have had the same hassle. Now, it didn't last long,
30, 45 days, because everybody's burned out and
tired of it. It's spring, and we're worn out with
that stuff. So it's a little flurry, and then it's
gone. All right. Describe the child fall routine.
for sophomore Duncan Collin? You're talking
about in September. In September, not much
different than a freshman would experience
today. But again, by November, they're no
different than a sophomore today. The senior and
junior eats first, and then you eat. But no more
table hassling. But you were, for the first few
months, you were to serve them? Yeah, you pretty
much sat at attention and ate when you were told to
eat. And if you were told not to eat, you didn't eat.
And all of those good things. The good jobs,
waiting tables, usually went to the juniors and
seniors. Those were the best jobs. Now, those were
also good juniors and seniors. who made sure that
nobody went without food. If you stayed at that
table, they'd bring you out a complete table
serving